doc/sql.extensions/README.set_bind.md, before:

# SQL Language Extension: SET BIND

##	Implements capability to setup columns coercion rules in current session.


### Author:

	Alex Peshkoff <peshkoff@mail.ru>


### Syntax is:

```sql
SET BIND OF type-from TO { type-to | LEGACY };
SET BIND OF type NATIVE;
```

### Description:

Makes it possible to define rules of describing types of returned to the client columns in non-standard way -
`type-from` is replaced with `type-to`, automatic data coercion takes place.

When incomplete type definition is used (i.e. `CHAR` instead `CHAR(n)`) in left part of `SET BIND` coercion
will take place for all `CHAR` columns, not only default `CHAR(1)`.
When incomplete type definiton is used in right side of the statement (TO part) firebird engine will define missing
details about that type automatically based on source column.

Special `TO` part format `LEGACY` is used when datatype, missing in previous FB version, should be represented in
a way, understandable by old client software (may be with some data losses). The following coercions are done for
legacy datatypes:

| Native datatype          | Legacy datatype             |
|--------------------------|-----------------------------|
| BOOLEAN                  | CHAR(5)                     |
| DECFLOAT                 | DOUBLE PRECISION            |
| NUMERIC(38)              | NUMERIC(18)                 |
| TIME WITH TIME ZONE      | TIME WITHOUT TIME ZONE      |
| TIMESTAMP WITH TIME ZONE | TIMESTAMP WITHOUT TIME ZONE |

Setting `NATIVE` means `type` will be used as if there were no previous rules for it.

Except SQL-statement there are two more ways to specify data coercion - tag `isc_dpb_set_bind` in DPB
and `DataTypeCompatibility` parameter in firebird.conf & databases.conf. The later the rule is introduced
(.conf->DPB->SQL) the higher priotiy it has.
I.e. one can override .conf in any other way any DPB from SQL statement.

Value of clumplet with `isc_dpb_set_bind` tag in DPB should be specified as a set of partially
formed SET BIND statements, i.e. with prefix SET BIND OF is omitted, separated by semicolons.
For example:
```c++
dpb->insertString(&status, isc_dpb_set_bind, "decfloat to char; numeric(38) to char");
```

`DataTypeCompatibility` is minor firebird version for which we want to provide some compatibility
regarding data types. That compatibility may be not absolute - for example SET BIND can't care about type
of particular SQL functions. The following types will be described in legacy form when `DataTypeCompatibility=3.0:`
DECFLOAT, NUMERIC(38) and TIME(STAMP) WITH TIME ZONE. When `DataTypeCompatibility=2.5` in addition to this
list BOOLEAN will be described as legacy type as well.


### SQL Samples:

```sql
SELECT CAST('123.45' AS DECFLOAT(16)) FROM RDB$DATABASE;	--native
```
```
                   CAST
=======================
                 123.45
```

```sql
SET BIND OF DECFLOAT TO DOUBLE PRECISION;
SELECT CAST('123.45' AS DECFLOAT(16)) FROM RDB$DATABASE;	--double
```
```
                   CAST
=======================
      123.4500000000000
```

```sql
SET BIND OF DECFLOAT(34) TO CHAR;
SELECT CAST('123.45' AS DECFLOAT(16)) FROM RDB$DATABASE;	--still double
```
```
                   CAST
=======================
      123.4500000000000
```

```sql
SELECT CAST('123.45' AS DECFLOAT(34)) FROM RDB$DATABASE;	--text
```
```
CAST
==========================================
123.45
```

Commit message:

Fixup some issues with numeric & decimal datatypes

doc/sql.extensions/README.set_bind.md, after:

# SQL Language Extension: SET BIND

##	Implements capability to setup columns coercion rules in current session.


### Author:

	Alex Peshkoff <peshkoff@mail.ru>


### Syntax is:

```sql
SET BIND OF type-from TO { type-to | LEGACY };
SET BIND OF type NATIVE;
```

### Description:

Makes it possible to define rules of describing types of returned to the client columns in non-standard way -
`type-from` is replaced with `type-to`, automatic data coercion takes place.

When incomplete type definition is used (i.e. `CHAR` instead `CHAR(n)`) in left part of `SET BIND` coercion
will take place for all `CHAR` columns, not only default `CHAR(1)`.
When incomplete type definiton is used in right side of the statement (TO part) firebird engine will define missing
details about that type automatically based on source column.
From this statement POV there is no difference between NUMERIC and DECIMAL datatypes. Changing bind of any NUMERIC
does not affect appropriate underlying integer type. On contrary, changing bind of integer datatype also affects
appropriate NUMERICs.

Special `TO` part format `LEGACY` is used when datatype, missing in previous FB version, should be represented in
a way, understandable by old client software (may be with some data losses). The following coercions are done for
legacy datatypes:

| Native datatype          | Legacy datatype             |
|--------------------------|-----------------------------|
| BOOLEAN                  | CHAR(5)                     |
| DECFLOAT                 | DOUBLE PRECISION            |
| NUMERIC(38)              | NUMERIC(18)                 |
| TIME WITH TIME ZONE      | TIME WITHOUT TIME ZONE      |
| TIMESTAMP WITH TIME ZONE | TIMESTAMP WITHOUT TIME ZONE |

Setting `NATIVE` means `type` will be used as if there were no previous rules for it.

Except SQL-statement there are two more ways to specify data coercion - tag `isc_dpb_set_bind` in DPB
and `DataTypeCompatibility` parameter in firebird.conf & databases.conf. The later the rule is introduced
(.conf->DPB->SQL) the higher priotiy it has.
I.e. one can override .conf in any other way any DPB from SQL statement.

Value of clumplet with `isc_dpb_set_bind` tag in DPB should be specified as a set of partially
formed SET BIND statements, i.e. with prefix SET BIND OF is omitted, separated by semicolons.
For example:
```c++
dpb->insertString(&status, isc_dpb_set_bind, "decfloat to char; numeric(38) to char");
```

`DataTypeCompatibility` is minor firebird version for which we want to provide some compatibility
regarding data types. That compatibility may be not absolute - for example SET BIND can't care about type
of particular SQL functions. The following types will be described in legacy form when `DataTypeCompatibility=3.0:`
DECFLOAT, NUMERIC(38) and TIME(STAMP) WITH TIME ZONE. When `DataTypeCompatibility=2.5` in addition to this
list BOOLEAN will be described as legacy type as well.


### SQL Samples:

```sql
SELECT CAST('123.45' AS DECFLOAT(16)) FROM RDB$DATABASE;	--native
```
```
                   CAST
=======================
                 123.45
```

```sql
SET BIND OF DECFLOAT TO DOUBLE PRECISION;
SELECT CAST('123.45' AS DECFLOAT(16)) FROM RDB$DATABASE;	--double
```
```
                   CAST
=======================
      123.4500000000000
```

```sql
SET BIND OF DECFLOAT(34) TO CHAR;
SELECT CAST('123.45' AS DECFLOAT(16)) FROM RDB$DATABASE;	--still double
```
```
                   CAST
=======================
      123.4500000000000
```

```sql
SELECT CAST('123.45' AS DECFLOAT(34)) FROM RDB$DATABASE;	--text
```
```
CAST
==========================================
123.45
```
